OPEN
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Highly conductive and ﬂexible ﬁber for textile
electronics obtained by extremely low-temperature
atomic layer deposition of Pt
Jaehong Lee1,6, Jaehong Yoon1,6, Hyun Gu Kim2, Subin Kang1, Woo-Suk Oh3, Hassan Algadi1,
Saleh Al-Sayari4, Bonggeun Shong3, Soo-Hyun Kim5, Hyungjun Kim1, Taeyoon Lee1 and Han-Bo-Ram Lee2
Thermal atomic layer deposition (ALD) of metal has generally been achieved at high temperatures of around 300 °C or at
relatively low temperatures with highly reactive counter reactants, including plasma radicals and O3, which can induce severe
damage to substrates. Here, the growth of metallic Pt layers by ALD at a low temperature of 80 °C is achieved by using
[(1,2,5,6-η)-1,5-hexadiene]-dimethyl-platinum(II) (HDMP) and O2 as the Pt precursor and counter reactant, respectively. ALD
results in the successful growth of continuous Pt layers at the low temperature without any reactive reactants owing to the low
activation energy of the HDMP precursor for surface reactions. Because of the high reactivity of the precursor, the growth of a
pure Pt layer is achieved on various thermally weak substrates, leading to the fabrication of high-performance conductive cotton
ﬁbers by ALD. A capacitive-type textile pressure sensor is successfully demonstrated by stacking elastomeric rubber-coated
conductive cotton ﬁbers perpendicularly and integrating them onto a fabric with a 7 × 8 array conﬁguration to identify the
features of the applied pressure, which can be effectively utilized as a new platform for future wearable and textile electronics.
NPG Asia Materials (2016) 8, e331; doi:10.1038/am.2016.182; published online 25 November 2016
INTRODUCTION
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) has widely attracted considerable
interest for various high technologies, such as semiconductor devices
and display devices,1–3 because of its superb ability to deposit ultrathin
ﬁlms with excellent controllability and conformality even on complex
three-dimensional
(3D)
structures.1–8
Based
on
these
superior
properties, ALD has been intensively studied for several applications.
In particular, textile electronics using the ALD is one of the promising
ﬁelds since several materials can be readily deposited at temperatures
lower than 150 °C by ALD, leading to the effective functionalization of
thermally fragile substrates such as plastics, cellulose papers and
polymeric textiles.9–12 Chen et al.13 demonstrated hydrophobic silk
fabrics with a high laundering durability and robustness due to a TiO2
coating deposited by ALD. However, in the case of metal ALD, since
temperatures as high as 300 °C are generally required to achieve
successful deposition with the thermal energy of the precursor
reactions, it is difﬁcult to deposit conformal metal ﬁlms onto
thermally weak substrates using ALD, causing difﬁculties in a wide
range of applications, including textile electronics.14,15 To ensure
successful metal ALD at low temperatures, ALD in which the
precursor is combined with a plasma-generated radical as highly
reactive counter reactants has been investigated; however, the high
energy of the plasma causes degradation of substrates that do not have
a high thermal stability and robustness under plasma conditions.16–19
In addition, Dendooven et al.20 investigated Pt ALD at low
temperatures around 100 °C by using O3 as a reactant with a
(methylcyclopentadienyl)trimethylplatinum (MeCpPtMe3) precursor.
A signiﬁcant reduction of the growth temperatures in the ALD can be
achieved by using O3 as a counter reactant; nevertheless, the use of O3,
which has a high reactivity, leads to several drawbacks, such as severe
damage that can fully etch stable substrates—including graphite—and
limitations in conformal deposition on complex 3D structures with
high aspect ratios.21–24 These negative effects of the previously
reported metal ALD severely limit the application of metal ALD that
require thermally fragile substrates, despite the low deposition
temperatures, as such substrates, which are generally composed of
polymeric materials, have not only poor durability against mechanical
damage but also highly complex 3D structures.
Herein, we describe an effective ALD process for Pt achieved at
temperatures as low as 80 °C using [(1,2,5,6-η)-1,5-hexadiene]
1School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea; 2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Incheon National University,
Incheon, Republic of Korea; 3Department of Chemistry, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea; 4College of Science and Arts at Sharurah, Promising Center
for Sensors and Electronic Devices, Najran University, Najran, Saudi Arabia and 5School of Materials Science and Engineering, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan-si, Republic of
Korea
Correspondence: Professor T Lee, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Yonsei-ro 50, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea.
E-mail: taeyoon.lee@yonsei.ac.kr
or Professor H-B-R Lee, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Incheon National University, 119 Academi-ro, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22012, Republic of Korea.
E-mail: hbrlee@inu.ac.kr
6These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 2 June 2016; revised 23 September 2016; accepted 26 September 2016
NPG Asia Materials (2016) 8, e331; doi:10.1038/am.2016.182
www.nature.com/am

dimethylplatinum(II) (HDMP) and O2 as a precursor and counter
reactant. The HDMP precursor exhibited a signiﬁcantly lower
activation energy of 22.6 kcal mol−1 for surface reactions than the
MeCpPtMe3 precursor due to its molecular geometries, leading to the
high reactivity even without any reactive counter reactants at the low
temperature. To the best of our knowledge, the report of the successful
metal ALD at the low temperatures below 100 °C with only O2 as a
counter reactant has never been discussed. By using low-temperature
ALD for Pt, highly conformal Pt layers were deposited onto various
thermally weak substrates, such as a strand of hair, papers and cotton
ﬁbers, which enables the substrates to have excellent electrical
properties. As a proof of concept, a high-performance capacitive
textile pressure sensor was successfully fabricated by crossing two
conductive cotton ﬁbers coated with poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS)
perpendicularly. The textile pressure sensor provided high perfor-
mances such as a high sensitivity, a high stability and an extremely low
detection limit. In addition, large-area textile pressure sensor arrays
with a 7 × 8 array conﬁguration were realized on a fabric to recognize
the spatial distribution of pressure by a simple sewing method, which
can be useful for various advanced wearable and textile electronics.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Low-temperature ALD
A commercial ALD chamber with a 4-inch capable stage was used for the study
(Supplementary Figure S1). The HDMP precursor, which was synthesized and
provided by TANAKA KIKINZOKU KOGYO.K.K (Supplementary Figure S2),
was stored in a stainless steel canister, whose temperature was maintained at
50 °C to obtain an appropriate molecular supply during the ALD process. The
HDMP canister was connected to the process chamber by one port, and
vaporized HDMP molecules were transported by N2 carrier gas. The counter
reactant was O2, and its ﬂow was controlled by a mass-ﬂow controller, which
was supplied from a 99.99% O2 cylinder. N2 was used for both the carrier gas
and purging gas, which also was controlled by mass-ﬂow controller.
The standard ALD process comprised four steps: precursor exposure (ts),
N2 purging (tp), reactant exposure (tr) and purging. For better conformality and
uniformity, an inﬁltration step was performed after the precursor and reactant
exposure step.
Fabrication of textile-based pressure sensors
The conductive ﬁbers produced by Pt ALD were located perpendicular to the
ground on a stand with 100 g weights. Then, 1.5 ml of a PDMS solution, which
was composed of a Sylgard 184 base and a curing agent with a weight ratio of
5:1 (base:curing agent), ﬂowed along the conductive ﬁbers at a constant ﬂow
rate of 0.5 ml s −1. After a sufﬁcient time had passed for the formation of a
uniform layer of PDMS solution on the surface of the conductive ﬁbers, the
ﬁbers were annealed at 80 °C for 2 h. Then, the two PDMS-coated conductive
ﬁbers were crossed perpendicularly.
Quantum chemical calculations
Density functional theory calculations were performed employing ORCA
program suite.25 The geometries were optimized using the hybrid-generalized
gradient approximation (GGA) B3LYP-D3 functional with the def2-SVP basis
set and the corresponding effective core potential for the Pt atom.26 The
single-point energies of the optimized geometries were obtained with double-
hybrid-meta-GGA PWPB95-D3 functional with the zeroth-order regular
approximation (ZORA) for relativistic effects and the zeroth-order regular
approximation-TZVP (Ahlrichs' triple zeta valence basis set with an additional
set of polarization functions, as deﬁned in ref. 27) basis set for all atoms.28–30
The RIJCOSX approximation was applied to all calculations to improve the
computational speed.31 The hydroxylated silica surface was modeled with a Si
(OH)4 cluster. The transition-state geometries were initially guessed and then
conﬁrmed after optimization to have a single imaginary vibrational frequency
along the reaction coordinate.
Characterization
The surface morphologies were examined using a JEOL JSM-7001F ﬁeld
emission scanning electron microscope (SEM). The microstructure of the ALD
Pt ﬁlms was analyzed by using X-ray diffraction (Ultima IV, Rigaku, Tokyo,
Japan). The apparent coverage was computationally calculated using ImageJ
software from SEM plan-view images. Chemical composition analysis was
performed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (K-ALPHA, Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA), and the resistivity of the Pt layer was measured
using a four-point probe system. The durability of the conductive cotton ﬁber
under a bending test was measured using a customized bending machine. The
weight fraction of Pt in the conductive ﬁber was evaluated using a thermo-
gravimetry analysis (Q50, TA Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA). The
capacitance of the pressure sensor was measured at a frequency of 300 kHz
with a 1 V AC signal by using an Agilent (Santa Clara, CA, USA) E4980A,
Precision LCR Meter. The mechanical force and its frequency for the
measurement of the sensing performance were controlled by a universal
manipulator (Teraleader, Daejeon, Republic of Korea).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To investigate the deposition of Pt ﬁlm by ALD with an HDMP
precursor, the saturation behavior and self-limiting surface reactions
of the ALD were veriﬁed by measuring the growth per cycles (GPCs)
of the deposited Pt according to the precursor and counter-reactant
exposure time as shown in Figure 1a. The deposition process for Pt
was carried out using HDMP and O2 gas as a precursor and counter
reactant, respectively, at 300 °C. The GPCs of the deposited Pt were
saturated at a precursor exposure time of 2 s and reactant exposure
time of 4 s, indicating that the deposition of Pt was achieved in a
self-limiting surface reaction mode of ALD. To compare the
deposition characteristics of the HDMP precursor with a MeCpPtMe3
precursor, which is widely used for the ALD of Pt, the apparent
coverage of Pt deposited on a SiO2/Si substrate by ALD was examined
for incremental ALD cycles as shown in Figure 1b. Although the
apparent coverage of the Pt ﬁlm by ALD with the MeCpPtMe3
precursor reached 100 % at around 400 cycles, the surface coverage
of the Pt ﬁlm deposited using the HDMP precursor exhibited a
signiﬁcantly rapid increase of surface coverage in a low cycle region
and reached a plateau at around 100 cycles, indicating that the HDMP
precursor adsorbed far more actively on the surface, leading to faster
nucleation than MeCpPtMe3.
For a more quantitative analysis, an isothermal nucleation and
growth model that was used in our studies regarding Pt nanoparticles
was adopted for both precursors.32 According to the isothermal model
based on nucleation incubation, the surface coverage of deposited Pt
can be calculated as follows:
A
A0
¼ 1  exp ðA0
Z t
0
IoetI
t p ðn t  t
ð
ÞÞ2dtÞ;
ð1Þ
where A and A0 are the total area covered by the deposited Pt and the
area of the substrate, respectively; t is the number of ALD cycles with
the steady-state nucleation rate Io; and the GPCs of the Pt ﬁlm ν is
deﬁned by thickness per an ALD cycle and the nucleation incubation
time τI. The apparent coverage data calculated by the isothermal
model are represented by solid lines in Figure 1b, exhibiting excellent
agreement with the experimental results, with correlation coefﬁcients
(R2) of 0.991 and 0.997 for the MeCpPtMe3 and HDMP precursors,
respectively. Important variables, including the steady-state nucleation
rate (Io) and the nucleation incubation time (τI), were determined
from the calculation based on the theoretical model, as shown in
Table 1. The steady-state nucleation rate (Io) of Pt ALD for the HDMP
precursor was far faster (eight times) than that for the MeCpPtMe3
precursor, inducing a rapid increase of nucleation sites. In addition,
Highly Conductive and Flexible Fiber
J Lee et al
2
NPG Asia Materials

Figure 1 (a) GPCs of Pt ﬁlms according to the exposure time of the precursor and counter reactants during the ALD process. HDMP and O2 gas were used as
the precursor and counter reactant, respectively, for the ALD of Pt. (b) Apparent coverage of the Pt ﬁlms deposited by ALD using the MeCpPtMe3 (blue) and
HDMP (red) precursors. The solid lines indicate the corresponding ﬁtting results for the nucleation model. (c–f) Typical SEM images showing the Pt
deposited via ALD using the MeCpPtMe3 precursor (c, d) and the HDMP precursor (e, f) at 100 and 200 cycles. (g) Density functional theory-calculated
energies of the critical points along the reaction coordinate for the adsorption of the two precursors. (h) Electrical resistivity of the Pt ﬁlms deposited by ALD
according to the number of ALD cycles.
Highly Conductive and Flexible Fiber
J Lee et al
3
NPG Asia Materials

there was hardly any nucleation incubation time (τI), which is deﬁned
as the time needed to form surface species for Pt nucleation, for the
HDMP precursor despite the long nucleation incubation time of 21
cycles for the MeCpPtMe3 precursor. These results show that the ALD
for Pt based on the HDMP precursor has an excellent efﬁciency with
regard to the nucleation of Pt compared with the MeCpPtMe3
precursor. Figure 1c–f show typical SEM images of Pt deposited on
SiO2/Si substrates using the MeCpPtMe3 and HDMP precursors at
300 °C with 100 and 200 cycles. As shown in the SEM images, the Pt
ALD using the HDMP precursor achieved a high surface coverage
close to a continuous ﬁlm, whereas the Pt deposition using the
MeCpPtMe3 precursor yielded a morphology of island growth in the
same cycles of the ALD process. In addition, to compare ALD Pt
deposited by using other precursors, the X-ray diffraction spectra were
measured from ALD Pt ﬁlms on SiO2 substrates using the HDMP
precursors and O2 counter reactants at various deposition tempera-
tures of 200, 250 and 300 °C, as shown in Supplementary Figure S3.
For all the Pt ﬁlms deposited with various growth temperatures, the
X-ray diffraction results show a metallic Pt(111) diffraction peak at
40.013°, which corresponds to the formation of the metallic Pt(111)
crystal plane,23 indicating that the ALD Pt ﬁlms with the HDMP
precursor have a polycrystalline microstructure, similar to Pt ﬁlms
deposited with other Pt precursors.
The adsorption mechanism of the Pt precursor in the ALD was
investigated by density functional theory calculations (Figure 1g). The
reactions of the precursor with the silanol moiety of the hydroxylated
silica surface, resulting in the elimination of CH4 and the adsorption
of the rest were considered.33 The activation energy for such surface
reaction of HDMP (22.6 kcal mol −1) was signiﬁcantly lower than that
of MeCpPtMe3 (40.8 kcal mol−1), which is consistent with experi-
mental observations. The difference between the energetics of the two
precursors can be attributed to their molecular geometries. The
transition states of both precursors assume a square pyramidal
geometry that imposes steric repulsion between the ligands, as
described in Supplementary Figure S4. Although the binding conﬁg-
uration of η4-1,5-hexadinene for HDMP is similar for both the
molecular precursor and the transition state, η5-MeCp of MeCpPtMe3
suffers a large hindrance upon the ﬁfth coordination to Pt and
becomes η1 in the transition state, losing its aromaticity and thus
exhibiting a larger endothermicity. On the other hand, the adsorption
energy of the CH4-eliminated Pt fragments was only marginally more
exothermic for HDMP (−11.1 kcal mol−1) than for MeCpPtMe3
(−6.3 kcal mol−1), which is expected because the same bonds were
cleaved (Pt-C and O-H) and formed (Pt-O and C-H) in either
reaction. Therefore, the far higher nucleation rate and shorter
nucleation incubation period of HDMP compared with MeCpPtMe3
are explained by the intrinsically higher reactivity of the HDMP
molecule upon dissociative adsorption.
Figure 1h shows the electrical properties of the Pt ﬁlms deposited
using both precursors according to the number of cycles in the ALD
process. Although a low electrical resistivity of 16.3 μΩ·cm was
achieved at 400 cycles in the case of the Pt ﬁlm grown with the
MeCpPtMe3 precursor, the deposited Pt ﬁlm was not electrically
conductive under 300 cycles, indicating the poor continuity of the ﬁlm
at the deposition conditions as shown in Figure 1c and d. The
electrical resistivity of the Pt ﬁlm deposited using the HDMP precursor
was signiﬁcantly reduced to 11.2 μΩ·cm, which is comparable to the
bulk resistivity of Pt (10.5 μΩ·cm),17 at 400 cycles and even exhibited
excellent electrical properties under the poor condition of 100 cycles.
For metal ALD, undesired effects such as nucleation delay or island
growth, which hinder a high conformality and the thickness control of
the deposited metal ﬁlm, can occur frequently. These are mainly due
to the high surface energy of the metal, which can lead to the low
wettability of the metal and agglomeration into metal islands during
the ALD process. Therefore, in metal ALD, it is generally difﬁcult to
control the thickness of the ﬁlm and achieve a continuous ﬁlm when a
thin ﬁlm with a thickness of a few nanometers is desired. Nevertheless,
the Pt ﬁlm grown by Pt ALD using the HDMP precursor exhibited a
resistivity of 170 μΩ·cm in 50 cycles, as shown in Figure 1f, indicating
that a continuous Pt ﬁlm was successfully achieved through ALD using
the HDMP precursor, although the ﬁlm are very thin, having a
thickness of 4 nm.
To verify the high reactivity of the HDMP precursor for Pt ALD
with regard to the growth temperature, the deposition of the Pt ﬁlm
was investigated for various growth temperatures. Figure 2a shows the
GPCs of the Pt ﬁlms on SiO2/Si substrates obtained by ALD with the
two precursors as a function of the deposition temperature. The GPCs
of the Pt ﬁlms deposited using the HDMP and MeCpPtMe3 precursors
were measured as 0.88 and 0.54 Å per cycle, respectively, in their ALD
windows (HDMP precursor: 250–300 °C, MeCpPtMe3 precursor:
275–300 °C), conﬁrming the high reactivity of the HDMP precursor.
The HDMP precursor, in particular, yielded the successful deposition
of Pt even at a temperature as low as 80 °C, at which ALD for Pt using
the MeCpPtMe3 precursor and O2 as a counter reactant was not
achieved. As described in Figure 2b, based on the superb efﬁciency of
the HDMP precursor for depositing Pt at a low temperature, the Pt
ﬁlm deposited at the low temperature (80 °C) had a high electrical
performance of 172 μΩ·cm, which is related to the excellent continuity
of the ﬁlm, despite the use of O2 gas as a counter reactant instead of
O3 gas or plasma treatment. To evaluate the quality of the deposited Pt
ﬁlm, ﬁlms deposited using the HDMP precursor at 100 and 300 °C
were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, as shown in
Figure 2c. The two peaks in the Pt core-level energy region of the
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy spectra described in Figure 2c are
characterized by metallic Pt 4f7/2 (71 eV) and 4f5/2 (74.2 eV). There is
no considerable deconvolution of the peaks, owing to the formation of
PtOx (72.3, 73.8 eV), indicating that the deposited Pt ﬁlm has a high
purity despite the low deposition temperature. Since it is difﬁcult to
successfully deposit Pt ﬁlms at low temperatures by ALD with the
MeCpPtMe3 precursor and O2 counter reactants, low-temperature
ALD for high-purity Pt ﬁlms using the HDMP precursor and a stable
counter reactant (O2 gas) can be effectively applied to coat conformal
Pt layers on thermally fragile substrates. Using the strong advantage of
low-temperature ALD for Pt, Pt layers were successfully deposited
onto the surfaces of various thermally weak substrates, including a
strand of hair and a sheet of paper. As shown in the SEM images of
Figure 2d–i, the Pt layers were conformally deposited onto the surfaces
of the substrates without any remarkable destruction of the structure,
despite their poor thermal stability.
To demonstrate the ability of the low-temperature ALD, highly
conductive ﬁbers were successfully fabricated by depositing Pt layers
Table 1 Fitting parameters based on the isothermal nucleation model
Precursors
R2a
Iob
τI [s]c
MeCpPtMe3
0.99112
0.56× 10−4
21
HDMP
0.99685
4.07× 10−4
8.97× 10−7
Abbreviations: HDMP, [(1,2,5,6-η)-1,5-hexadiene]dimethylplatinum(II); MeCpPtMe3,
(methylcyclopentadienyl)trimethylplatinum.
aCorrelation coefﬁcient related to the agreement between experimental results and
theoretical model.
bSteady-state nucleation rate for Pt in ALD.
cNucleation incubation time for Pt in ALD.
Highly Conductive and Flexible Fiber
J Lee et al
4
NPG Asia Materials

onto the surfaces of cotton ﬁbers, which are the most frequently used
textile in the related industry, through ALD with the HDMP
precursor. Various conductive ﬁbers using carbon-based material
and metal material have been intensively studied for its promising
applications such as sensors, organic displays and energy storage
devices.34–36 As shown in Figure 3a, the original cotton ﬁber had a
complex 3D structure owing to its twisted structure of yarns and
comprised mostly cellulose, which is a thermally weak polymeric
material. Nevertheless, conformal Pt layers were successfully deposited
onto the entire surface of the cotton ﬁber by ALD without any
considerable damage to the ﬁber, as shown in the SEM images of
Figure 3b and c. The energy dispersive spectroscopy mapping image of
the conductive cotton ﬁber shows that the Pt layer was uniformly
deposited onto the surface of the 3D structure of the conductive ﬁber
through ALD using the HDMP precursor (Supplementary Figure S5).
Figure 3d provides a photograph of the conductive cotton ﬁber coated
with the Pt layer and the untreated cotton ﬁber, showing that the
surface color of the conductive cotton ﬁber was changed to gray owing
to the conformally deposited Pt layer. Because of the highly effective
Pt coating through the ALD, the Pt layer deposited on the cotton ﬁber
maintained its continuity and conformality regardless of the number
of ALD cycles (Supplementary Figure S6), and the conductive cotton
ﬁber exhibited excellent electrical properties. Figure 3e displays the
electrical resistance per unit length (Ω cm−1) of the conductive cotton
ﬁber, indicating
that the
electrical resistance was reduced
to
2.72 Ω cm−1 by increasing the number of cycles. Although the
thickness of the Pt layers deposited on the cotton ﬁber may increase
linearly as a function of the number of cycles, the electrical resistance
of the conductive cotton ﬁber was inversely proportional to the square
of the number of cycles. This is because the cross-sectional area of the
Pt layers deposited on the cotton ﬁber, which is inversely proportional
to the electrical resistance of the conductive ﬁber, is proportional to
the square of the thickness of the Pt layers. According to the results,
conductive cotton ﬁbers with the desired electrical resistance can be
fabricated by modulating the number of ALD cycles and can be
applied to easily turn on a light-emitting diode easily (Supplementary
Figure 2 (a–b) GPCs (a) and electrical resistivity (b) of the Pt ﬁlms according to the growth temperatures during the ALD process with respect to the two
precursors. (c) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy spectra of Pt ﬁlms grown by ALD with the HDMP precursor at the temperatures of 100 and 300 °C.
(d) SEM image of the surface of a pristine hair strand. (e–f) SEM images of a Pt-coated hair strand (e) after ALD at low temperatures and a corresponding
higher-magniﬁcation image (f) (inset shows a far higher-magniﬁcation SEM image of f). (g) SEM image showing the complex 3D surface of pristine paper.
(h–i) SEM images of the surface of Pt-coated paper (h) and corresponding higher-magniﬁcation images (i).
Highly Conductive and Flexible Fiber
J Lee et al
5
NPG Asia Materials

Figure S7 and Video 1). Figure 3f provides the excellent electrical
stability of the conductive cotton ﬁber under a repeated bending test
of 1000 cycles, which involved bending deformation with a bending
radius of 3 mm and the unfolding of the back of the ﬁber. Despite the
intensive repeated cycles of folding deformation, the electrical
resistance of the conductive cotton ﬁber was slightly increased by
only 2.03 % (16.71–17.05 Ω cm−1), indicating the high stability of the
conductive cotton ﬁber. The high stability under repeated external
stimulations is attributed to the excellent conformality and continuity
of the Pt layers deposited on the surfaces of the complex 3D structures
of the cotton ﬁbers. In addition, thermogravimetric analysis measure-
ments, which provide weight-content information about the Pt
components in the conductive cotton ﬁber, were conducted as shown
in Supplementary Figure S8. The weight content of Pt in the
conductive cotton ﬁber was measured as 8.91–17.87 wt%, which is
far smaller than that in previously reported metal-based conductive
ﬁbers (60–85 wt%).37,38 The very small weight content of Pt in the
conductive cotton ﬁber, despite the excellent electrical performance, is
mainly attributed to the ultrathin and conformal Pt layer deposited by
ALD and enables the conductive cotton ﬁber fabricated by low-
temperature Pt ALD to have a strong advantage regarding cost-
effectiveness, as only an ultrasmall amount of noble metal is needed to
fabricate the conductive ﬁber.
To demonstrate the ability of conductive cotton ﬁber to be applied
to textile electronics, a high-performance textile pressure sensor was
fabricated by crossing the Pt ALD conductive ﬁbers after a PDMS layer
was coated on the surface of the conductive ﬁbers, as shown in
Figure 4a. The PDMS layer uniformly covered the conductive ﬁbers
after the PDMS solution ﬂowed along the vertical conductive ﬁbers
perpendicular to the ground and the samples were cured. After the
crossing of the two PDMS-coated conductive ﬁbers, a capacitive
pressure sensor was built at the cross point of the ﬁbers where the two
conductive cotton ﬁbers act as electrodes and the PDMS layer coated
on the conductive ﬁbers functioned as an elastic dielectric layer of the
capacitor, as shown in the schematic of Figure 4a. Since PDMS has
been generally used as an elastic dielectric material in capacitive
pressure sensors for artiﬁcial skin owing to its outstanding elastic
properties, the capacitance generated between the two conductive
ﬁbers at the cross point can be changed by the thickness change of the
elastic dielectric layer induced by the applied pressure. To examine the
ability of the textile pressure sensor to respond to external pressure,
the capacitive responses (ΔC/Co) of the textile pressure sensor to
applied loads of 0.1, 0.5 and 1 N were examined, as shown in
Figure 4b. The pressure sensor had stable responses despite the
successive loading and unloading of the various loads, conﬁrming its
reliability. In addition, the textile pressure sensor exhibited a rapid
change in the capacitive response against progressively increasing force
applied to the sensor, indicating its high sensitivity, as shown in
Figure 4c. The high sensitivity of the textile pressure sensor results
from simultaneous changes in both the contact area of the two
PDMS-coated conductive ﬁbers and the thickness of the dielectric
layer in the textile pressure sensor according to the increasing external
pressure.37 For typical capacitive pressure sensors, the related equation
governing the capacitance of the sensors is provided by C = ε0εr(A/d),
where ε0 and εr refer to the space permittivity and relative dielectric
constant of the dielectric material, respectively, A and d denote the
area of the capacitor and the distance between the separated
electrodes, respectively. The change in the distance between electrodes
is mainly used to detect the applied pressure based on the thickness
change of the elastomeric dielectric layer in general capacitive pressure
sensors. However, when the external pressure compresses the textile
pressure sensor, the thickness of the PDMS layer, which is directly
Figure 3 (a) Plain-view ﬁeld emission scanning electron microscope image of the complex 3D structures of the pristine cotton ﬁber. (b–c) SEM images
showing the surface of Pt-coated cotton ﬁber obtained by ALD at low temperatures (b) and a corresponding higher-magniﬁcation SEM image (c). The inset in
(c) shows a far higher-magniﬁcation SEM image. (d) Photograph of the pristine cotton ﬁber and Pt-coated cotton ﬁber obtained by ALD. (e) Electrical
resistance change of the Pt-coated conductive cotton ﬁber with respect to the number of ALD cycles. (f) Change in the relative electrical resistance of the
conductive cotton ﬁber during the 1000-cycle bending test.
Highly Conductive and Flexible Fiber
J Lee et al
6
NPG Asia Materials

related to the distance between electrodes, is reduced and the contact
area between the two PDMS-coated conductive ﬁbers, which is related
to the area of the capacitor, is increased at the same time, resulting in a
signiﬁcant enhancement of the sensing performance. The decreasing
slope in the graph described in Figure 4c, which indicates the
sensitivity of the pressure sensor, in the higher applied-force regime
above 0.1 N is attributed to the increase in the contact area of the
sensor, inducing decrease of the effective stress applied on the contact
area.37 Based on the high performance of the textile pressure sensor, it
was possible to reliably detect the placement and removal of an
ultrasmall weight of around 30 mg, which is similar to the weight of a
houseﬂy, as shown in Figure 4d. The capacitive response of the textile
pressure sensor was also found to be highly durable and reproducible
against repeatedly applied pressures. Figure 4e exhibits the capacitive
response of the textile pressure sensor under the repeated loading and
unloading of an external load, indicating that the capacitance changes
of the pressure sensor were stably maintained even under the intensive
cycling test, which involved the loading and unloading of a load of
0.4 N for over 10 000 cycles.
As a proof of concept, a large-area 7 × 8 array conﬁguration of the
textile-based pressure sensors was fabricated on a cotton fabric with a
total area of 50× 40 cm by sewing the sensors, as shown in Figure 4f.
Using a simple sewing method, numerous textile pressure sensors can
be easily imbedded into any fabric as all-textile devices that can obtain
spatial pressure information (Supplementary Figure S9). The smart
fabric was used as a seat sensor to detect the spatial distribution of the
applied pressure on the seat. In the case of vehicles, it is highly
important to distinguish the features of a sitter, such as the body type,
weight and presence of objects like a car seat. Figure 4g shows a
capacitive-response mapping of the 56 pixel pressure sensor array
against a sitter, where the bright regions correspond to the increased
capacitance change of a pressure sensor. As demonstrated in
Figure 4f–g, the smart fabric, including the pressure sensor array on
a seat, detected the pressure distributions generated by the sitters
(Supplementary Figure S10). In particular, owing to the high
Figure 4 (a) Photograph of the fabricated textile pressure sensor based on Pt-coated conductive cotton ﬁber on a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate
and a corresponding schematic illustration of the pressure sensor. (b) Capacitive response of the textile pressure sensor to various loads of 0.1, 0.5 and 1 N.
(c) Relative capacitance change with respect to the increasing applied load. (d) Capacitive response of the textile pressure sensor to the loading and
unloading of a light weight (30 mg). (e) Stability of the textile pressure sensor under an applied load of 0.05 N for over 10 000 cycles. (f) Photographs of a
textile-based pressure sensor array with a 7 × 8 conﬁguration. (g) Capacitive-response mapping of the 56 pixel textile pressure sensor array for a sitter, where
the bright regions correspond to the increased capacitance change of a pressure sensor.
Highly Conductive and Flexible Fiber
J Lee et al
7
NPG Asia Materials

performance of each pressure sensor in the array, the textile pressure
sensor array on the fabric could successfully classify the body types of
the sitters (Supplementary Figure S11). These results indicate that our
textile pressure sensor fabricated using conductive cotton ﬁbers
exhibits signiﬁcant potential to be used as an advanced occupant-
classiﬁcation system for vehicles. We expect the pressure sensors to be
effectively utilized for various advanced wearable systems via the
simple sewing method.
CONCLUSION
In summary, we developed a powerful ALD process for Pt that can be
successfully achieved at temperatures as low as 80 °C and fabricated a
highly conductive cotton ﬁber and textile pressure sensor using this Pt
ALD process. Using an HDMP precursor with an unprecedented
reactivity, Pt layers were conformally deposited on thermally fragile
substrates by ALD at low growth temperatures. Using the highly
conductive ﬁbers prepared by Pt ALD, a high-performance capacitive
textile pressure sensor was successfully fabricated. The textile pressure
sensor exhibited a high sensitivity and excellent durability despite
pressures repeatedly applied for 10 000 cycles. In addition, we
demonstrated that the textile pressure sensor has enormous potential
for realization of advanced e-textiles via the integration of multiple
sensors onto a fabric in a large-area 7 × 8 array conﬁguration to be
utilized to an occupant-classiﬁcation system that can identify the
features of sitters. We believe that the textile pressure sensor and smart
fabrics obtained through low-temperature Pt ALD are promising
candidates for various wearable and smart fabric applications as a new
platform for future textile electronics.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of
Education (2016R1D1A1B03935611) and the MOTIE (Ministry of Trade,
Industry & Energy; 10053098) and KSRC (Korea Semiconductor Research
Consortium) support program for the development of the future
semiconductor device. This work was also supported by the Priority Research
Centers Program (Grant No. 2009-0093823) through the National Research
Foundation (NRF) of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and
Technology (MEST), the R&D program of MOTIE/KEIT (Korea Evaluation
Institute of Industrial Technology) [10064081, Development of ﬁber-based
ﬂexible multimodal pressure sensor and algorithm for gesture/posture-
recognizable wearable devices], and the Ministry of Higher Education,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for supporting this research through a grant (PCSED-
009-14) under the Promising Centre for Sensors and Electronic Devices
(PCSED) at Najran University, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We thank the
TANAKA KIKINZOKU KOGYO.K.K. for helpful support of the Pt precursor.
1
King, J. S., Wittstock, A., Biener, J., Kucheyev, S. O., Wang, Y. M., Baumann, T. F.,
Giri, S. K., Hamza, A. V, Baeumer, M. & Bent, S. F. Ultralow loading Pt nanocatalysts
prepared by atomic layer deposition on carbon aerogels. Nano Lett. 8, 2405–2409
(2008).
2
Hyde, G. K., Park, K. J., Stewart, S. M., Hinestroza, J. P. & Parsons, G. N. Atomic layer
deposition of conformal inorganic nanoscale coatings on three-dimensional natural ﬁber
systems: effect of surface topology on ﬁlm growth characteristics. Langmuir 23,
9844–9849 (2007).
3
Christensen, S. T., Elam, J. W., Rabuffetti, F. A., Ma, Q., Weigand, S. J., Lee, B.,
Seifert, S., Stair, P. C., Poeppelmeier, K. R., Hersam, M. C. & Bedzyk, M. J. Controlled
growth of platinum nanoparticles on strontium titanate nanocubes by atomic layer
deposition. Small 5, 750–757 (2009).
4
Jiang, X., Huang, H., Prinz, F. B. & Bent, S. F. Application of atomic layer deposition of
platinum to solid oxide fuel cells. Chem. Mater. 20, 3897–3905 (2008).
5
Yoneoka, S., Lee, J., Liger, M., Yama, G., Kodama, T., Gunji, M., Provine, J.,
Howe, R. T., Goodson, K. E. & Kenny, T. W. Electrical and thermal conduction in
atomic layer deposition nanobridges down to 7 nm thickness. Nano Lett. 12,
683–686 (2012).
6
Lin, Y.-H., Hsueh, Y.-C., Lee, P.-S., Wang, C.-C., Wu, J. M., Perng, T.-P. & Shih, H. C.
Fabrication of tin dioxide nanowires with ultrahigh gas sensitivity by atomic layer
deposition of platinum. J. Mater. Chem. 21, 10552 (2011).
7
Knez, M., Nielsch, K. & Niinistö, L. Synthesis and surface engineering of complex
nanostructures by atomic layer deposition. Adv. Mater. 19, 3425–3438 (2007).
8
Schwartzberg, A. M. & Olynick, D. Complex materials by atomic layer deposition. Adv.
Mater. 27, 5778–5784 (2015).
9
Jur, J. S., Sweet, W. J., Oldham, C. J. & Parsons, G. N. Atomic layer deposition of
conductive coatings on cotton, paper, and synthetic ﬁbers: conductivity analysis and
functional chemical sensing using ‘all-ﬁber’ capacitors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 21,
1993–2002 (2011).
10 Hyde, G. K., McCullen, S. D., Jeon, S., Stewart, S. M., Jeon, H., Loboa, E. G. &
Parsons, G. N. Atomic layer deposition and biocompatibility of titanium nitride nano-
coatings on cellulose ﬁber substrates. Biomed. Mater. 4, 025001 (2009).
11 Jur, J. S., Spagnola, J. C., Lee, K., Gong, B., Peng, Q. & Parsons, G. N. Temperature-
dependent subsurface growth during atomic layer deposition on polypropylene and
cellulose ﬁbers. Langmuir 26, 8239–8244 (2010).
12 Kemell, M., Pore, V., Ritala, M., Leskelä, M. & Lindén, M. Atomic layer deposition
in nanometer-level replication of cellulosic substances and preparation of photocatalytic
TiO2/cellulose composites. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127, 14178–14179 (2005).
13 Chen, F., Yang, H., Liu, X., Chen, D., Xiao, X., Liu, K., Li, J., Cheng, F., Dong, B.,
Zhou, Y., Guo, Z., Qin, Y., Wang, S. & Xu, W. Facile fabrication of multifunctional hybrid
silk fabrics with controllable surface wettability and laundering durability. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 8, 5653–5660 (2016).
14 Hämäläinen, J., Munnik, F., Ritala, M. & Leskelä, M. Atomic layer deposition of
platinum oxide and metallic platinum thin ﬁlms from Pt(acac) 2 and ozone. Chem.
Mater. 20, 6840–6846 (2008).
15 Lee, H.-B.-R., Pickrahn, K. L. & Bent, S. F. Effect of O3 on growth of Pt by atomic layer
deposition. J. Phys. Chem. C 118, 12325–12332 (2014).
16 Longrie, D., Devloo-Casier, K., Deduytsche, D., Van den Berghe, S., Driesen, K. &
Detavernier, C. Plasma-enhanced ALD of platinum with O2, N2 and NH3 plasmas. ECS
J. Solid State Sci. Technol 1, Q123–Q129 (2012).
17 Knoops, H. C. M., Mackus, A. J. M., Donders, M. E., van de Sanden, M. C. M.,
Notten, P. H. L. & Kessels, W. M. M. Remote plasma ALD of platinum and platinum
oxide ﬁlms. Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 12, G34 (2009).
18 Baker, L., Cavanagh, A. S., Seghete, D., George, S. M., Mackus, A. J. M.,
Kessels, W. M. M., Liu, Z. Y. & Wagner, F. T. Nucleation and growth of Pt atomic
layer deposition on Al2O3 substrates using (methylcyclopentadienyl)-trimethyl platinum
and O2 plasma. J. Appl. Phys. 109, 084333 (2011).
19 Heo, J., Lee, S. Y., Eom, D., Hwang, C. S. & Kim, H. J. Enhanced nucleation behavior
of atomic-layer-deposited Ru ﬁlm on low-k dielectrics afforded by UV-O[sub 3]
treatment. Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 11, G5 (2008).
20 Dendooven, J., Ramachandran, R. K., Devloo-Casier, K., Rampelberg, G., Filez, M.,
Poelman, H., Marin, G. B., Fonda, E. & Detavernier, C. Low-temperature atomic layer
deposition of platinum using (methylcyclopentadienyl)trimethylplatinum and ozone.
J. Phys. Chem. C 117, 20557–20561 (2013).
21 Lee, H.-B.-R. & Bent, S. F. Formation of continuous Pt ﬁlms on the graphite
surface
by
atomic
layer
deposition
with
reactive
O3.
Chem.
Mater.
27,
6802–6809 (2015).
22 Hämäläinen, J., Hatanpää, T., Puukilainen, E., Sajavaara, T., Ritala, M. & Leskelä, M.
Iridium metal and iridium oxide thin ﬁlms grown by atomic layer deposition at low
temperatures. J. Mater. Chem. 21, 16488 (2011).
23 Hämäläinen, J., Munnik, F., Ritala, M. & Leskelä, M. Study on atomic layer
deposition of amorphous rhodium oxide thin ﬁlms. J. Electrochem. Soc. 156,
D418 (2009).
24 Knoops, H. C. M., Elam, J. W., Libera, J. A. & Kessels, W. M. M. Surface loss in ozone-
based atomic layer deposition processes. Chem. Mater. 23, 2381–2387 (2011).
25 Neese, F. The ORCA program system. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Mol. Sci. 2,
73–78 (2012).
26 Goerigk, L. & Grimme, S. Efﬁcient and accurate double-hybrid-meta-GGA density
functionals-evaluation with the extended GMTKN30 database for general main group
thermochemistry, kinetics, and noncovalent interactions. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7,
291–309 (2011).
27 Weigend, F. & Ahlrichs, R. Balanced basis sets of split valence, triple zeta valence and
quadruple zeta valence quality for H to Rn: Design and assessment of accuracy. Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 7, 3297–3305 (2005).
28 Grimme, S., Antony, J., Ehrlich, S. & Krieg, H. A consistent and accurate ab initio
parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94
elements H-Pu. J. Chem. Phys. 132, 154104 (2010).
29 van Wüllen, C. Molecular density functional calculations in the regular relativistic
approximation: method, application to coinage metal diatomics, hydrides, ﬂuorides and
chlorides, and comparison with ﬁrst-order relativistic calculations. J. Chem. Phys. 109,
392 (1998).
30 Pantazis, D. A., Chen, X.-Y., Landis, C. R. & Neese, F. All-electron scalar relativistic
basis sets for third-row transition metal atoms. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 4, 908–919
(2008).
31 Neese, F., Wennmohs, F., Hansen, A. & Becker, U. Efﬁcient, approximate and parallel
Hartree–Fock and hybrid DFT calculations. A ‘chain-of-spheres’ algorithm for the
Hartree–Fock exchange. Chem. Phys. 356, 98–109 (2009).
Highly Conductive and Flexible Fiber
J Lee et al
8
NPG Asia Materials

32 Lee,
H.-B.-R.,
Mullings,
M. N., Jiang,
X.,
Clemens,
B.
M.
&
Bent, S.
F.
Nucleation-controlled growth of nanoparticles by atomic layer deposition. Chem. Mater.
24, 4051–4059 (2012).
33 Kessels, W. M. M., Knoops, H. C. M., Dielissen, S. A. F., Mackus, A. J. M.
& van de Sanden, M. C. M. Surface reactions during atomic layer deposition
of
Pt
derived
from
gas
phase
infrared
spectroscopy.
Appl.
Phys.
Lett.
95,
013114 (2009).
34 Peng, H., Sun, X., Cai, F., Chen, X., Zhu, Y., Liao, G., Chen, D., Li, Q., Lu, Y., Zhu, Y.
& Jia, Q. Electrochromatic carbon nanotube/polydiacetylene nanocomposite ﬁbres.
Nat. Nano 4, 738–741 (2009).
35 Chen, T., Qiu, L., Yang, Z., Cai, Z., Ren, J., Li, H., Lin, H., Sun, X. & Peng, H. An
integrated ‘energy wire’ for both photoelectric conversion and energy storage. Angew.
Chemie Int. Ed. 51, 11977–11980 (2012).
36 Zhang, Z., Guo, K., Li, Y., Li, X., Guan, G., Li, H., Luo, Y., Zhao, F., Zhang, Q., Wei, B.,
Pei, Q. & Peng, H. A colour-tunable, weavable ﬁbre-shaped polymer light-emitting
electrochemical cell. Nat. Phot. 9, 233–238 (2015).
37 Lee, J., Kwon, H., Seo, J., Shin, S., Koo, J. H., Pang, C., Son, S., Kim, J. H.,
Jang, Y. H., Kim, D. E. & Lee, T. Conductive ﬁber-based ultrasensitive textile pressure
sensor for wearable electronics. Adv. Mater. 27, 2433–2439 (2015).
38 Lee, S., Shin, S., Lee, S., Seo, J., Lee, J., Son, S., Cho, H. J., Algadi, H., Al-Sayari, S.,
Kim, D. E. & Lee, T. Ag nanowire reinforced highly stretchable conductive ﬁbers for
wearable electronics. Adv. Funct. Mater. 25, 3114–3121 (2015).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s
Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit
line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license,userswillneedto obtainpermissionfromthelicense holderto
reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
r The Author(s) 2016
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the NPG Asia Materials website (http://www.nature.com/am)
Highly Conductive and Flexible Fiber
J Lee et al
9
NPG Asia Materials
