=== ABSTRACT (1501 chars) ===
Barium oxide (BaO) is a critical component for a number of materials offering high dielectric constants, high proton conductivity as well as potential applicability in superconductivity. For these properties to keep pace with continuous device miniaturization, it is necessary to study thin film deposition of BaO. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) enables single atomic layer thickness control, conformality on complex shaped substrates, and the ability to precisely tune stoichiometry. Depositing multicomponent BaO containing ALD films in a self-limiting manner at low temperatures may extend the favorable bulk properties of these materials into the ultrathin film regime. Here we report the first temperature and dose independent thermal BaO deposition using a novel pyrrole based Ba precursor (py-Ba) and water (H2O) as the co-reactant. The growth per cycle (GPC) is constant at 0.45 Å with excellent self-terminating behavior. The films are smooth (root mean squared (RMS) roughness 2.1 Å) and contain minimal impurities at the lowest reported deposition temperatures for Ba containing films (180-210 1 C). We further show conformal coating of non-planar substrates (aspect ratio B 1:2.5) at step coverages above 90%. Intermixing TiO2 ALD layers, we deposited amorphous barium titanate with a dielectric constant of 35. The presented approach for infusing self-terminating BaO in multicomponent oxide films may facilitate tuning electrical and ionic properties in next-generation ultrathin devices.

=== CONCLUSION (1051 chars) ===
A new pyrrole based precursor (py-Ba) enabled the first selflimiting ALD growth of BaO. Using H2O as oxidant, we have reported the lowest BaO deposition temperature thus far (180-210 1 C) at a GPC of 0.45 Å per cycle on Si substrates. The deposited films show high purity, compositional uniformity, smooth surface and conformality on non-planar substrates. As a proof-of-concept for depositing multicomponent BaO containing films, BTO was grown intermixing BaO with TiO2 (TTIP as Ti precursor and H2O as oxidant). Promising electrical properties on an MIM structure have been reported for as-deposited amorphous BTO films. The results show that self-limiting BaO deposition using py-Ba as precursor allows exploiting the properties of BaO containing multinary materials in the ultrathin regime. In applications requiring precise thickness and stoichiometry control, conformal coverage over large areas and on complex shaped substrates, low roughness and low deposition temperatures, py-Ba will likely play a role in future ALD processes involving BaO.

=== CAPTIONS (9 non-empty; 6/14 figures had EMPTY captions) ===
Fig 6: Fig. 1 Schematic of customized ALD reactor for deposition of BaO and BTO films.
Fig 7: Fig. 2 (a) GPC plotted versus substrate temperature (b) GPC versus boosting time (standard deviation: 7 measurements on 4 inch wafer). The downward arrow indicates the process parameter chosen for further experiments. The y -axis in red shows the calculated total pressure in the precursor cylinder in mbar as mentioned in the ESI. †
Fig 8: Fig. 3 (a) Film thickness plotted versus number of Ba precursor exposures per BaO full cycle (b) thickness variation as a function of number of oxidant (H2O) pulses. A steady state was attained after 5-10 H2O pulses. 100 cycles were deposited in total.
Fig 9: Fig. 4 (a) XPS depth profile of BaO film obtained at 210 1 C substrate temperature and 2 s boosting time. (b) C 1s, O 1s and Ba 3d5/2 X-ray photoelectron peaks on the surface of the film and post surface etching.
Fig 10: Fig. 5 A 3D representation of BaO thin film grown at 210 1 C. The film thickness is B 4.5 nm and RMS roughness is B 2.1 Å from AFM measurement.
Fig 11: Fig. 6 (a) Cross sectional TEM image of BaO film deposited on patterned Si substrate with aspect ratio B 1 : 2.5; the central cavity of the trenches are filled with amorphous carbon for structure protection during ion milling; positions 0, 1 and 2 are highlighted as top, side and bottom of the trench, respectively. High resolution TEM of the positions 0, 1 and 2 are shown in (b), (c) and (d) respectively, white arrows show the thickness of BaO as obtained from STEM-EELS line scans (ESI, † Fig. S6).
Fig 12: Fig. 7 (a) XPS Depth profile of as deposited BTO grown on Si substrate at 210 1 C. (b) High resolution cross sectional TEM image of B 7 nm thick BTO film with stoichiometry at Ti/(Ba + Ti) = 0.53 (Ba : Ti B 1 : 1) on a Si substrate with an interfacial oxide thickness of B 2 nm.
Fig 13: Fig. 8 Representative leakage current ( I -V ) characteristics of Pt/BTO/Ru capacitor measured for a 20 nm thick BTO layer. The top electrode defines the capacitor area (0.68 /C2 10 /C0 3 ) 2 m 2 .
Table 0: Table 1 Energy (eV) required to break bonds between the first and second ligand for py-Ba and the commonly used cp-Ba precursors, 39 DFT calculation using Gaussian 09. Optimized geometry is in Fig. S6, ESI