=== ABSTRACT (1256 chars) ===
Understanding the chemical mechanisms at play in atomic layer deposition (ALD) is critical for effective process development and expansion of ALD into more complex classes of materials. In this work, a mechanistic study of iron oxide deposited by ALD using tert-butylferrocene and ozone as reactants is performed. Iron oxide ALD using ozone is a useful model system for mechanistic studies due to the prevalence of ozone-based ALD processes and the uses of iron oxide in ternary and quaternary metal oxides. Results show that saturation conditions require significantly greater exposures of both reactants than is typically reported in the literature, and growths per cycle of greater than one monolayer of Fe2O3 per cycle are observed and explained. A growth mechanism is proposed whereby increased ozone exposure results in uptake of superstoichiometric oxygen into the flm. X-ray characterizations reveal the presence of excess oxygen stored near the surface of films deposcause crystalline domain rearrangement and conversion of the film from the ymaghemite phase to the α-hematite phase. The mechanism described here has implications for the wider class of ozone-based ALD processes, and potential applications of this growth phenomenon are discussed.

=== CONCLUSION (1725 chars) ===
An ALD process for the growth of Fe2O3 was developed and characterized, using tert-butylferrocene as the metal precursor and ozone as the coreactant. Saturation conditions and growth behavior were investigated, with an emphasis on understanding the effects of ozone exposure on the deposition process.A model for oxygen uptake into the film is presented, supported by X-ray spectroscopic and refectivity measurements showing the presence of excess oxygen in the surface region of the film. The mechanism identifies and explains how high precursor exposure saturation conditions result in high ALD growths per cycle, an effect that has not yet been fully addressed in the literature. Implications of this growth mechanism are also reflected in the structural properties of the films. Ozone exposure was found to impact the crystallinity of the resulting films by both increasing film crystallinity and converting the Y maghemite phase into the α hematite phase. This phenomenon presents a novel way of rearranging atoms in the film without the need for higher temperature annealing. The phase dependence on ozone exposure can be used both to tune the phase between the pure Yphase and pure α phase and to control the orientation of crystalline domains. Other ALD processes relying on ozone as a coreactant may also exhibit similar behaviors, possibly including our preliminary work on NiO ALD and the study of MnO ALD by Young et al.7ol Additionally, this mechanism may affect growth and behavior of ternary ALD systems by introducing reactive surface oxygen species that could infuence the precursor chemisorption. Further investigation of these phenomena and more detailed mechanistic studies are the subject of future work.

=== CAPTIONS (6 non-empty; 2/8 figures had EMPTY captions) ===
Fig 1: Figure 1. Growth of iron oxide flms as measured by VASE. a) The growth per cycle as a function of ozone exposure with a saturating exposure of TBF.Because the TBF exposure required to reach saturation increases with ozone exposure,at each data point in (a),the TBF exposure was increased sufficiently to ensure TBF saturation for each ozone pulse length.b) The growth per cycle as a function of TBF exposure with a saturating exposure of ozone. Similar to (a), the ozone exposure used to generate each data point was increased sufficiently to ensure ozone saturation for each TBF exposure. c) The flm thickness as a function of number of cycles.All films were deposited with 10 s of ozone and 90-100 torr-s ofTBF per cycle (this TBF dose corresponds to saturation for this particular ozone exposure). The dotted line is the linearleast squares best fit to the data,the indicated
Fig 2: Figure 2. Film compositions calculated from angle-resolved XPS measurements of Fe2O3 films grown with varying levels of ozone exposure. All samples were grown with 20-50 torr-s of TBF exposure except for the x10 TBF flm which was grown using 400 torr-s TBF exposure.Film thicknesses are 160, 135, 215, 50, and 90 A, in order of legend appearance. Angles are given with respect to the sample surface plane, so smaller angles are at more grazing incidence and thus more surface sensitive.
Fig 4: Figure 4. a) XRR measurement of a 24.0 nm thick Fe2O3 flm,shown in orange. Calculated intensity shown in red is generated from a bilayer model reflecting a gradient of density within the flm,in which the surface region of the film is less dense than the bulk. The blue curve is generatedfromasimplermodelwheredensityisassumedtobeconstant throughout the flm.Data are truncated below θ= 0.04° to omit sample edge effects from the analysis.b)A plot of the electron density of the bilayer model used in (a),reflecting the thicknesses, densities, and roughnesses found from ftting the model in (a). The lower density region of excess oxygen is visible near the surface with a gradual transition to the bulk Fe2O3 region, followed by the SiO2/Si substrate of lower electron density.Thesmoothcontoursatthesurface and atinterfaces arisefrom surface and interfacial roughness.
Fig 5: face region of the flm and each TBF exposure consumes oxygen from the flm.This schematic is illustrated in the case in which the TBF exposure is saturating, so that all excess oxygen is consumed.
Fig 6: Figure 6.a) Integrated 2D GIWAXS scans of Fe2O3 flms, summed over all measured angles X as a function of Q. Three scans of flms grown using 100,60,and 20 s of ozone exposure under saturated TBF doses are shown,together with the primary peaks of α-Fe2O3 andFe2O3 indicated with black triangles and gray circles, respectively.65,71 Film thicknesses for the 20,60, and 100 s ozone samples are 90, 138, and 140 A, respectively. b) Approximate phase composition between the α and yphases, as calculated from the ratio of the area of the 2.13 A-1 peak to the area of the 2.49 A-1 peak. Films here were grown using a wide range of TBF exposures.Error bars indicating one standard deviation are shown for ozone exposures at which multiple samples were grown; points shown at 10, 20, 80, and 140 s consist of a single sample.
Fig 7: Figure 7. 2D GIWAXS patterns of Fe2O3 films grown with a) 30s,b) 60s, c) 120s, and d) 140s of ozone exposure per cycle.The TBF exposure in (d) is twice that of (c),and all patterns are plotted on the same intensity color scale.All visible diffraction rings correspond to the α phase with the exception of one faint yphase ring in (a) that is indicated with the red arrows.The thicknesses ofthe films shown in (a-d) are 129,135, 50, and 120 A,respectively. Thefaintpentagonalpatterncommontoeachsubfigureis attributed tothesiliconsubstrate.