=== ABSTRACT (908 chars) ===
Many energy conversion and storage devices exploit structured ceramics with large interfacial surface areas. Vertically aligned carbon nanotube (VACNT) arrays have emerged as possible scaffolds to support large surface area ceramic layers. However, obtaining conformal and uniform coatings of ceramics on structures with high aspect ratio morphologies is non-trivial, even with atomic layer deposition (ALD). Here we implement a diffusion model to investigate the effect of the ALD parameters on coating kinetics and use it to develop a guideline for achieving conformal and uniform thickness coatings throughout the depth of ultra-high aspect ratio structures. We validate the model predictions with experimental data from ALD coatings of VACNT arrays. However, the approach can be applied to predict film conformality as a function of depth for any porous topology, including nanopores and nanowire arrays.

=== CONCLUSION (1747 chars) ===
Our model and experiments indicate that limited penetration depth and non-uniformity of the ALD coatings of VACNTs result from the combination of slower diffusion and increased demand for precursor supply, effects that become increasingly important with each ALD cycle. This finding allows us to propose and subsequently validate that uniform ALD coatings to a desired depth within a high-aspect-ratio structure can be achieved by cycle-to-cycle variation of the precursor exposure time. For the sake of convenience, a summary of important variables that were used in the modeling is given in Table 2. Figure 6: Experimental results for TiO 2 coated VACNTs. (a) An SEM image of a VACNT array coated with 400 cycles of TiO 2 is shown with close-up SEM images at depths of ca. 5, 25, and 80 μ m. At 5 μ m, a thick and conformal coating of TiO 2 is evident. At 25 μ m the oxide coating is visibly thinner, and exposed CNTs are visible, at which the oxide beads have not merged, yet. Down at approx. 80 μ m, only small nucleations of the oxide are noticeable. The TiO 2 thickness on the CNTs (determined by the measurement of the coated-CNT diameter distribution) as a function of depth is plotted in (b) for samples coated with 200 (circles) and 400 (squares) cycles. Error bars are indicated by the size of the points. Plot (c) shows the thickness of aluminum dioxide as a function of depth for the samples prepared with 100 cycles (blue circles) and 200 cycles (red squares), for which the precursor exposure time was fixed at 0.2 s, along with a plot for a sample prepared where the precursor exposure time was scaled as a function of ALD cycles between the 100th and 200th cycles (black diamonds). <!-- image --> | variable | description | unit |

=== CAPTIONS (6 non-empty; 1/7 figures had EMPTY captions) ===
Fig 1: Figure 1: Illustration of one ALD cycle on a VACNT array. Upon exposure to the precursor gas (a: bulk gas diffusion), precursor molecules diffuse into the CNT array and adsorb onto available sites (b: confined diffusion and adsorption). After the defined precursor exposure time, purging of the ALD chamber removes unreacted precursor molecules from the chamber (c). After the oxidization pulse, a thin layer of oxide is formed on the surface (d).
Fig 2: Figure 2: Flow chart of the precursor exposure/adsorption simulation for one ALD cycle.
Fig 3: Figure 3: Results of the precursor adsorption kinetics simulation while using the parameters defined in Table 1. The concentration of precursor molecules as a function of depth at several time steps (0 to 50 ms, with 5 ms intervals) within the CNT array is plotted in (a). The effect of the reactive sticking coefficient is demonstrated in (b), where the deposited oxide thickness per cycle is plotted versus the depth in the array, after 50 ms exposure. In (c) the effect of the precursor exposure time is plotted. In (d), the penetration depth of the oxide is plotted as a function of the precursor concentration, exposure time, Knudsen diffusion coefficient, and radius of the CNTs with a reactive sticking coefficient of 10 -2 . The penetration depth clearly depends on the square root of the precursor concentration, exposure time, and diffusion coefficient, but has a nontrivial dependence on the radius of the CNTs.
Fig 4: Figure 4: Comparison of the simplified model (Equation 18) and the simulation of the full diffusion model (solid line) while using a reactive sticking coefficient Γ = 1, as function of the varying precursor surface adsorption density. The penetration depths given by both methods are in agreement.
Fig 5: Figure 5: Plot of deposited oxide thickness with respect to the VACNT depth for a multi-cycle ALD process, determined by the model with the parameters in Table 1. (a) Fixed precursor exposure time (50 ms). (b) Scaled exposure time according to Equation 19.
Fig 6: Figure 6: Experimental results for TiO 2 coated VACNTs. (a) An SEM image of a VACNT array coated with 400 cycles of TiO 2 is shown with close-up SEM images at depths of ca. 5, 25, and 80 μ m. At 5 μ m, a thick and conformal coating of TiO 2 is evident. At 25 μ m the oxide coating is visibly thinner, and exposed CNTs are visible, at which the oxide beads have not merged, yet. Down at approx. 80 μ m, only small nucleations of the oxide are noticeable. The TiO 2 thickness on the CNTs (determined by the measurement of the coated-CNT diameter distribution) as a function of depth is plotted in (b) for samples coated with 200 (circles) and 400 (squares) cycles. Error bars are indicated by the size of the points. Plot (c) shows the thickness of aluminum dioxide as a function of depth for the samples prepared with 100 cycles (blue circles) and 200 cycles (red squares), for which the precursor exposure time was fixed at 0.2 s, along with a plot for a sample prepared where the precursor exposure time was scaled as a function of ALD cycles between the 100th and 200th cycles (black diamonds).