=== ABSTRACT (913 chars) ===
X-ray grating interferometry is an excellent technique for X-ray phase contrast imaging and X-ray wavefront sensing with applications in materials science, biology and medical diagnosis. Among other requirements, the method depends on the availability of highly X-ray absorbing metallic gratings. Here, we report on the fabrication and characterization of high aspect ratio iridium gratings with a period of one micrometer and a depth of 30 µ m combining deep reactive ion etching of silicon and atomic layer deposition of iridium. The implementation of such structures can greatly enhance the sensitivity of grating-based X-ray phase contrast imaging and thus, expand further its broad range of applications. Keywords: Grating-based X-ray Interferometry; Deep Reactive Ion Etching of Silicon; Atomic Layer Deposition of Iridium ∗ Corresponding author Email address: joan.vila-comamala@psi.ch (Joan Vila-Comamala)

=== CONCLUSION (1023 chars) ===
In summary, we have demonstrated the fabrication and characterization of high aspect ratio iridium gratings with a period of one micron and a depth of 30 µ m for X-ray phase contrast imaging. The combination of deep RIE of silicon and atomic layer deposition of iridium has been proven as an effective fabrication method to produce high quality X-ray absorbing gratings. The technique has the potential of producing even smaller period gratings over larger areas ( &gt; 5 × 5 cm 2 ) if used together with new emerging lithography technologies such as Displacement Talbot Lithography[25] that have the capability of producing sub-micrometer grating patterns over large areas (4 and 8-inch wafers). We believe that the proposed method can be used to provide high quality gratings that will greatly enhance the sensitivity of gratingbased X-ray phase contrast imaging and broaden its range of applications. In addition, the technique could be easily transferred for the production of other microcomponents and optical devices.

=== CAPTIONS (6 non-empty; 0/4 figures had EMPTY captions) ===
Fig 0: Figure 1: Schematics of laboratory grating-based phase contrast X-ray imaging setup composed of two highly absorbing X-ray gratings, G 0 and G 2 , and a phase-shifting X-ray grating, G 1 (not to scale).
Fig 1: Figure 2: Fabrication steps of the X-ray gratings by combining deep reactive ion etching of silicon and atomic layer deposition of iridium. After the photolithography step (a), the grating pattern is transferred into the chromium hard mask, (b), used during the silicon deep reactive ion etching, (c). The final atomic layer deposition step, (d), coats the silicon trenches with a conformal layer of iridium.
Fig 2: Figure 3: (a) Scanning electron micrograph of the silicon grating fabricated by deep reactive ion etching with a periodicity of 2 µ m, a depth of 30 µ m and a duty cycle of 0.25. (b) One micrometer iridium grating after the atomic layer deposition process. (c) and (d) demonstrate the obtained conformality by comparing the thickness of iridium at the top and bottom of the silicon trenches. (e) (a) Low magnification scanning electron micrograph of the one micrometer iridium X-ray grating.
Fig 3: Figure 4: (a) Picture of the laboratory X-ray phase imaging setup with the fabricated one micrometer period iridium gratings mounted as G 0 and G 2 . (b) and (c) display the differential phase contrast images of a sample made of 700 µ m silicon oxide spheres obtained at the 9th and 13rd Talbot orde 2 r 0 configurations. The inset plots shows the histogram of the visibility obtained, that is a direct evaluation parameter of the gratingbased X-ray phase contrast imaging setup.
Table 0: Table 1: Detailed parameters of the silicon deep reactive ion etching recipe. An ICP Plasmalab 100 system from Oxford Instruments Plasma Technology (UK) was used.
Table 1: Table 2: Detailed parameters of the iridium atomic layer deposition recipe for conformal coating of high aspect ratio silicon trenches. The recipe is divided in three separate processes: a deposition of a thin layer of Al 2 O 3 to ensure the iridium growth; the nucleation of iridium using O 2 plasma-based recipe to obtain smoother iridium layer; the deposition of the required iridium thickness using thermal O 2 -based recipe to prioritize a conformal coating of the silicon.